# Placement with ACM and Placement API

In this section, we will explore how to manage the placement of applications using the integration between Advanced Cluster Management (ACM) and Argo CD. This integration ensures that when a new OpenShift Cluster is imported into ACM, it becomes available in the Argo CD Controller. By leveraging one of the `ApplicationSet` Generators, specifically the [Cluster Decision Resource Generator](https://argo-cd.readthedocs.io/en/stable/operator-manual/applicationset/Generators-Cluster-Decision-Resource/), ACM can control the target location for application deployments.

To streamline the use of the [Cluster Decision Resource Generator](https://argo-cd.readthedocs.io/en/stable/operator-manual/applicationset/Generators-Cluster-Decision-Resource/), ACM offers an API known as the [Placement API](https://open-cluster-management.io/concepts/placement/). This API allows you to design the desired placement behavior by configuring a `Placement` object.

## Configure the Environment

To utilize the Placement API and create the necessary `Placement` object, follow these steps:

1. Access your OpenShift console in the **Hub cluster**.
2. Click the `+` button to add resources.
3. Paste the following content:

  ```yaml
  apiVersion: cluster.open-cluster-management.io/v1beta1
  kind: Placement
  metadata:
    annotations:
      argocd.argoproj.io/sync-wave: "3"
      argocd.argoproj.io/sync-options: SkipDryRunOnMissingResource=true
    name: demo-placement
    namespace: openshift-gitops
  spec:
    clusterSets:
      - cloud
      - edge
    numberOfClusters: 1
    predicates:
      - requiredClusterSelector:
          claimSelector:
            matchExpressions:
              - key: demo.status
                operator: In
                values:
                  - good
                  - average
    prioritizerPolicy:
      configurations:
        - scoreCoordinate:
            builtIn: ResourceAllocatableCPU
          weight: 2
        - scoreCoordinate:
            builtIn: ResourceAllocatableMemory
          weight: 2
  ```

There are three main components in this descriptor:

1. **`clusterSets`**: Defines the "groups" of clusters configured in ACM that are part of the placement scheduling.

2. **`predicates`**: Specifies filters to exclude clusters from those groups, based on metadata generated by a `ClusterClaim` object.

3. **`prioritizerPolicy`**: Determines where to deploy if the `numberOfClusters` is less than the number of available clusters.

Based on the configuration above, we will select a single cluster (`numberOfClusters: 1`) from the clusters in the `clusterSets` "cloud" and "edge" that have the metadata `demo.status` set to "good" or "average". If more than one cluster meets these criteria, the one with more available CPU and memory will be chosen.

In this scenario, we simulate that an external system tags the OpenShift clusters using a `ClusterClaim`, indicating whether the cluster is in a good state, has minor issues but is operational, or is in a bad state. During the demo, we will manually change these tags by modifying the `ClusterClaim` object to mimic the actions of this external system.

> **Note**
> 
> This is just an example. You can explore [more options](https://open-cluster-management.io/concepts/placement/) for configuration, such as selecting clusters from the `clustersets` by labeling them, or creating subgroups of clusters and specifying the number of APP deployments per group using the `decisionStrategy` section.

Two actions are required: first, assigning the imported clusters to the appropriate `clusterSet`, and then assigning the desired metadata to each cluster using the `ClusterClaim` object.

Let's start by assigning clusters to the `ClusterSets`:

1. Access the ACM console by selecting "All Clusters" in the top left on the **Hub cluster**.
2. Go to Infrastructure > Clusters and click on the "Cluster Sets" tab.
3. Select the "cloud" `clusterSet` and assign the `local-cluster` to it, then assign the edge-1 cluster to the "edge" `clusterSet`.

Now, since we will start by deploying on the cloud cluster, we will assign the value "good" to the `local-cluster` and "bad" to the `edge-1` by creating the corresponding `ClusterClaim` object in each cluster.

First, in the `local-cluster`:

1. Access your OpenShift console in the **Hub cluster**.
2. Click the `+` button to add resources.
3. Paste the following content:

    ```yaml
    apiVersion: cluster.open-cluster-management.io/v1alpha1
    kind: ClusterClaim
    metadata:
      name: demo.status
    spec:
      value: good
    ```

Then in the `edge-1` cluster

1. Access your OpenShift console in the **edge-1** cluster.
2. Click the `+` button to add resources.
3. Paste the following content:

    ```yaml
    apiVersion: cluster.open-cluster-management.io/v1alpha1
    kind: ClusterClaim
    metadata:
      name: demo.status
    spec:
      value: bad
    ```

  > **NOTE**
  >
  > We are creating these objects at this moment. From now on, you don't create them again, you will need to modify the already existing manifest.

Now everyting should be ready. With this configuration only the `local-cluster` will be selected for deployment. You can check that this is true by opening the corresponding `PlacementDecision` object linked to the `Placement` that we created:


1. Access your OpenShift console in the **Hub cluster**.
2. Go to "Home > API Explorer" and look for "PlacementDecision" objects
3. Review all instances and open `demo-placement-decision-1`
4. Open the YAML view and at the end, in the `status` section you will see the allowed clusters for this `Placement` object, in this case only `local-cluster`.


## Deploy on Cloud

Ok, now that we have prepared the initial state of our clusters, we can deploy the application:

1. Access your OpenShift console in the **Hub cluster**.
2. Click the `+` button to add resources.
3. Paste the following content:

    ```yaml
    apiVersion: argoproj.io/v1alpha1
    kind: ApplicationSet
    metadata:
      labels:
        app.kubernetes.io/managed-by: demo-placement-global
      name: demo-placement-global
      namespace: openshift-gitops
    spec:
      generators:
        - matrix:
            generators:
              - git:
                  directories:
                    - path: demos/placement/apps/welcome/*
                  repoURL: 'https://github.com/luisarizmendi/openshift-edge-demos.git'
                  revision: main
              - clusterDecisionResource:
                  configMapRef: acm-placement
                  labelSelector:
                    matchLabels:
                      cluster.open-cluster-management.io/placement: demo-placement
                  requeueAfterSeconds: 180
      goTemplate: true
      goTemplateOptions:
        - missingkey=error
      template:
        metadata:
          labels:
            app.kubernetes.io/managed-by: demo-placement-global
          name: '{{.path.basename}}-{{.name}}'
        spec:
          destination:
            namespace: '{{.path.basename}}'
            server: '{{.server}}'
          project: demo-placement
          source:
            helm:
              valueFiles:
                - values.yaml
                - environment/values-{{.name}}.yaml
            path: '{{.path.path}}'
            repoURL: 'https://github.com/luisarizmendi/openshift-edge-demos.git'
            targetRevision: main
          syncPolicy:
            automated:
              prune: true
              selfHeal: true
    ```

The `ApplicationSet` object above uses two generators, similar to the previous demo section. The first is a "Git generator" that generates `Application` manifests based on directories in a Git repository. The second is the `clusterDecisionResource` generator, which, as previously mentioned, generates an intermediate object (in this case called `PlacementDecision`) that determines the target clusters.

It also selects the `Placement` created earlier by adding a matching label `cluster.open-cluster-management.io/placement: demo-placement` requirement.

You will see how the "hello" APP is deployed on the Cloud OpenShift (`local-cluster`).

## Deploy on Edge

Imagine that we, or any external system, decide that the deployment of the "Hello" APP must be done in the Edge clusters, not in the Cloud.

To modify the placement behavior, we can patch the corresponding `ClusterClaim` objects with the new values. In this demo, we will do it manually by opening the objects in the OpenShift console.

Let's start with the `edge-1` cluster:

1. Access your OpenShift console in the **edge-1**.
2. Go to "Home > API Explorer" and look for "ClusterClaim" objects.
3. Review all instances and open `demo.status`.
4. Open the YAML view and change the value from "bad" to "good".

Now, two different things may happen:

### First Case

You go to the Argo CD console and see how, after some seconds, the "hello" APP is also deployed on the `edge-1` cluster and, if you wait a little longer, the APP will be deleted from the Cloud cluster. Why, if we still haven't configured the `ClusterClaim`? Remember that we configured in the `Placement` manifest a `prioritizerPolicy` that will select the cluster with less CPU and memory used, and we set the maximum number of APP deployments to one using the `numberOfClusters` key.

> **NOTE**
>
> This will only happen if your edge cluster has more available resources than the hub cluster, which is typical if you deployed two clusters with the same resources and installed ACM and Argo CD in one of them.

### Second Case

If that didn't happen (i.e., the `edge-1` cluster has less available CPU and memory than the Hub cluster), you can still remove the "hello" APP from the Hub cluster so it's installed in the `edge-1` cluster:

1. Access your OpenShift console in the **Hub Cluster**.
2. Go to "Home > API Explorer" and look for "ClusterClaim" objects.
3. Review all instances and open `demo.status`.
4. Open the YAML view and change the value from "good" to "bad".

After a few seconds, the "hello" APP will be deleted from the Cloud cluster and deployed on `edge-1`.

## Clean-Up

Once you have finished moving the app around your clusters, you can delete the `Application` and `ApplicationSet` objects:

1. Access your OpenShift console in the Hub cluster.
2. Click the `+` button to add resources.
3. Paste the following content:

    ```yaml
    apiVersion: batch/v1
    kind: Job
    metadata:
      generateName: cleanup-demo-placement-global-
      namespace: openshift-gitops
    spec:
      template:
        spec:
          serviceAccountName: openshift-gitops-argocd-application-controller
          containers:
            - name: delete-apps
              image: openshift/origin-cli:latest
              command: ["oc"]
              args: ["delete", "applications", "-n", "openshift-gitops", "-l", "app.kubernetes.io/managed-by=demo-placement-global"]
            - name: delete-appsets
              image: openshift/origin-cli:latest
              command: ["oc"]
              args: ["delete", "applicationsets", "-n", "openshift-gitops", "-l", "app.kubernetes.io/managed-by=demo-placement-global"]
          restartPolicy: Never
    ```

## Going beyond

You can experiment with dynamic assignment. For example, you can deploy a high CPU or memory demanding APP along with your "hello" APP and observe how ACM will reassign the "hello" APP to another cluster.

If you want to delve deeper, you can explore the "[Extensible scheduling](https://open-cluster-management.io/scenarios/extend-multicluster-scheduling-capabilities/)" capability of the Placement API. You can fork the [example add-on for extensible scheduling](https://github.com/open-cluster-management-io/addon-contrib/tree/main/resource-usage-collect-addon) repository and modify the code to assign scores based on criteria more relevant to an edge use case than CPU and memory availability.

For instance, referring back to the example that illustrates the "Challenge" we are trying to address, you can develop code that checks an external service monitoring the latency between the clients and the OpenShift clusters. This way, the APP placement can be based on that information. For example, you could deploy the APP in edge clusters only if the latency between the clients and the Cloud cluster is "high," or decide in which edge cluster to deploy based on selecting the one with the least latency to the final clients.



## Next

[Demo closing](../README.md#closing)




